Nick, thanks so much for being willing to come along and answer some questions for us.
Yes, I'm glad to come.
Well, now that we've got you here, the first question I'd like to ask you is,
what really are these so-called J references?
Well, the J in the J references stands for Jehovah.
And this is mainly a list of Bibles in Hebrew and other languages
that use the divine name Jehovah in the main text of the Christian Greek scriptures,
or at least some form of the name Jehovah.
And this list began to be compiled by the New World Bible translation committee in the 1940s.
So where would we find a list like that now?
Well, originally there was a list of 21 such references in the 1950 edition of the Christian
Greek scriptures. Then in 1984, 27 such references were included in the reference Bible in English.
And since that time, many more J references have been found.
And now the list includes over 90 such translations and reference works.
And you can find an up-to-date list in Appendix C4 of the reference Bible.
Very good. So I guess the main question we're interested in asking you is,
do these J references prove in themselves that the tetragramatham should be in the Christian
Greek scriptures? Actually no, they don't. I'm sure most of us weren't expecting you to say that.
So can you expand a little bit more please? Well, the New World translation committee did not rely
on the J references as the basis for their decision to restore the divine name in the Christian
Greek scriptures. You already discussed the basis for the decision earlier in the broadcast.
Rather, these J references provide proof that other translators have made similar decisions
when restoring the divine name to their editions of the Christian Greek scriptures or the so-called
New Testament. So now you're talking about these other Bible translators. Could you give us
an example of who you're talking about? Well, a number of them were well-known Bible scholars.
For example, 19th century Lutheran theologian Franz Delech is still considered to be a foremost
Bible scholar and a scholar of biblical Hebrew. Delech's translation of the New Testament in Hebrew
was produced in 1877 and it's one of the J references. In fact, it's still one of the best known
New Testaments in the Hebrew language. In that translation, he discerned when to use Jehovah's
name in places where the Greek text contains the term Kideos or Lord. The New World Bible Translation
Committee studied all those occurrences from his translation as well as the occurrences and
other others of the J references. So how would you summarize what the value is of these J references?
Well, all the J references, including the new ones in the study Bible, represent the view of
translators and scholars who arrived at the same conclusion that the New World Bible translation
committee did, namely that Jesus Christ and the apostles used the name Jehovah in their teaching
and in their writings and this conclusion is reflected in their translation and reference works.
Very interesting. That's fascinating. So if I've got to write then what you're saying is if we go
to Appendix C in C3, there we've got a list of the reasons why the brothers and the New World
Translation Committee decided to put Jehovah's name in certain verses. But then C4 is virtually
a list of other Bible translations where the translators made exactly the same decision.
Is that? That's exactly right. That's good. Well, thank you very much, Nick, for coming along.
We really appreciated hearing those expressions from you. Before you go though, can we ask you,
please, can you take back the love and greetings and an expression of appreciation to all those hard
working brothers and sisters, they're in translation services? Yes, I'd be happy to. Thank you very